 3.4. Further Analysis
 75
 efficiency, we should let T be less than 1, i.e. the jet speed be only a little larger
 than the flight speed, SO that one can obtain the desired thrust by increasing the
 flow rate, ma- For the fixed flight speed, increased flow rates are obtained by in-
 creasing the area of cross section of the flow. This is precisely what happens in a
 propeller where a large air flow is given a small velocity increment to obtain the
 desired thrust at high propulsive efficiency (n 95 %). We raise the next question:
 If propeller devices are SO efficient, how come other devices like turbojets are also
 The answer lies in the fluid mechanics associated with propellers. The flow
 over the airfoil cross sections of the propeller blades is governed by the vector
 combination of the flight speed and the local peripheral velocity of the rotating
 blade (2m R N, R = local radius, N = rotational speed of the propeller). At flight
 speeds of 450 km/hr (125 m/s), rotational speeds of 4500 rpm (75 rps), radius of
 about 0.5 m, the peripheral speed amounts to 235 m/s. Vector velocity over the
 blades amounts to 266 m/s. Expressed in terms of Mach numbers (the ratio of
 flow velocity to the speed of sound), the local Mach number is 0.8, approaching
 ac condition which leads to drastic reduction in the efficiency of the propeller, due
 to the formation of strong acoustic waves (weak shock waves) on the surface of
 the propeller. As such, propeller devices are not used for flight speeds beyond 450
 a 500 km/hr. Hence, other devices like turbojets have evolved. Also devices like
 turbojets have a much higher thrust per unit cross section and thus, enable better
 in existence?
 packaging.
 3.4.1 Non-Air Breathing Engines (Rocket Engines)
 In the case of rocket engines, the definition for propulsive efficiency leads to
 (3.12)
 Again, if we set the expression for thrust and propulsive efficiency together we
 Itcan be seen that the thrust ofthe rocket is independent offlight speed (otherwise
 an elementary fact). The propulsive efficiency is maximum (100 %) at T = 1 (see
 Figure 3.3). One feature different from that of air breathing engines is that T can
 be greater than unity i.e. the flight speed does not always have to be less than
 jet speed. This derives from the fact that the rocket engine generates its own hot
 At the same T, the propulsive efficiency of a rocket engine is larger than that of
 an airbreathing engine. At T = 0.425 ( = 222/522.0), from the previous example, Tp
 obtain,
 (3.13)
 gases, exhausting them through the nozzle to produce thrust.
